Business Intelligence and Data Warehouses
        preview
				
        The need for data analysis
			
        business intelligence
			def- business intelligence: A comprehensive, cohesive, and integrated set of tools and processes used to capture, collect, integrate, store, and analyze data with the purpose of generating and presenting information to support business decision making
                        table 13.1: Solving business problems and adding value with bi tools
				Cici's pizza
					problem: 1. Information access was cumbersome and time-consuming. 2. Needed to increase accuracy in the creation of marketing budgets. 3. Needed an easy, reliable, and efficient way to access daily data
					benefit: 1. Provided accurate, timely budgets in less time. 2. Provided analysts with access to data for decision-making purposes. 3. Received in-depth view of product performance by store to reduce waste and increase profits.
				NASDAQ
				Pfizer
				Swisscom
			Bi provides framework for:
				collecting and storing operational data
				aggregating the operational data into decision support data
				analyzing decision support data to generate information
				presenting such information to the end user to support business decisions
				Making business decisions, which in turn generate more data that is collected, stored and so on (restarting the process)
				monitoring results to evaluate outcomes of the business decisions, which again provides more data to be collected, stored, and so on
				predicting future behaviors and outcomes with a high degree of accuracy
                business intelligence architecture
                        figure 13.1: business intelligence framework
				people - External data and operational data which go to management
				management - ETL :Extraction, transformation, and loading (recieved from people and go to governance)
				governance -  Data store - Data warehouse to data mart (Data store receives from management and goes back and forth with proceseses)
				processes - (From bottom to top) Query & reporting, Monitoring and alerting / data analytics, Data visualizatioion, histogram (Query and reporting goes back and forth with data store).
                        table 13.2: basic BI architectural components
				ETL tools - Data extraction, transformation, and loading (ETL) tools collect, filter, integrate, and aggregate internal and external data to be saved into a data store optimized for decision support
					Def- ETL: In a data warehousing environment, the integrated processes of getting data from original sources into the data warehouse. ETL includes retrieving data from original data sources (extraction), manipulating the data into an appropriate form (transformation), and storing the data in the data warehouse (loading).
				Data Store - This data store is optimized for decision support and is generally represented by a data warehouse or a data mart. The data is stored in structures that are optimized for data analysis and query speed.
				Query and Reporting - This component performs data selection and retrieval, and it is used by the data analyst to create queries that access the database and create the required reports.
				Data visualization - This component presents data to the end userr in a variety of meaningful and innovative ways. This tool helps the end user select the most appropriate presentation format, such as summary reports, maps, pie or bar graphs, mixed graphs, and static or interactive dashboards.
				Data monitoring and alerting - This component allows real-time monitoring of business actitivities. The BI system will present concise information in a single integrated view. This integrated view could include specific metrics about the system performance or activities, such as number of orders placed in the last four hours, number of customer complainets by product by month, and total revenue by region. Alerts can be placed on a given metric; once the value of a metric goes below or above a certain baseline, the system will perform a given action, such as emailing shop floor managers, presenting visual alerts, or startng an application.
				Data analytics - This component performs data analysis and data-mining tasks using the data in the data store. This tool advises the user as to which data analysis tool to select and how to build a reliable business data model. Business models are generated by special algorithms that identify and enhance the understanding of business situations and problems
                        table 13.3: sample of business intelligence tools
				Dashboards and business activity monitoring - Dashboards use web-based technologies to present key business performance indicators or information in a single integrated view, generally using graphics that are clear, concise, and easy to understand (ex: salesforce, ibm/cognos, BusinessObjects, Information Builders, iDashboards, Tableau)
					Def - Dashboard: in business intelligence a web-based system that presents key business performance indicators or information in a single, integrated view with clear and concise graphics
				Portals - Portals provide a unified, single point of entry for information distribution. Portals are a web-based technology that use a web browser to integrate data from multiple sources into a single webpage. Many different types of BI functionality can be accessed through a portal. (Ex: Oracle Portal, Actuate, Microsoft, SAP)
					Def - Portal: In terms of business intelligence, a unified, single point of entry for information distribution
				Data analysis and reporting tools - These advanced tools are used to query multiple and diverse data sources to create integrated reports (Ex: Microsoft Reporting Service, MicroStrategy, SAS WebReportStudio)
				Data warehouses (DW) - The dataa warehouse is the foundation of a BI infrastructure. Data is captured from the production system and placed in the DW on a near real-time basis. BI provides company-wide integration of data and the capability to respond to business issues in a timely manner. (Ex: Microsoft, Oracle, IBM/cognos, Teradata)
				OLAP tools - Online analytical processing provides multidimensional data analysis (Ex: IBM/Cognos, BusinessObjects, Oracle, Microsoft)
				Data visualization - These tools provide advanced visual analysis and techniques to enhance understanding and create additional insight of business data and its true meaning. (Ex: Dundas, Tableau, QlikView, Actuate, Microsoft PowerBI)
				master data management (MDM): In business intelligence, a collection of concepts, techniques, and processes for the proper identification, definition, and management of data elements within an organization
				governance In business intelligence, the methods for controlling and monitoring business health and promoting consistent decision making.
				Key performance indicators (KPI) :In business intelligence, quantifiable numeric or scale-based measurements that assess a company's effectiveness or success in reaching strategic and operational goals. Examples of KPI's are product turnovers, sales by promotion, sales by employee, and earnings per share
				Examples of KPI:
					General - year to year measurements of profit by line of business, same-store sales, product turnovers, product recalls, sales by promotion, and sales by employee 
					Finance - Earnings per share, profit margin, revenue per employee, percentage of sales to account receivables, and assets to sales
					Human Resources - Aplicants to job openings, employee turnover, and employee longevity
					Education - Graduation rates, number of incoming freshmen, student retention rates, publication rates, and teaching evaluation scores
				Modern BI system provides three distinctive reporting styles:
					Advanced reporting - A BI system presents insightful information about the orginization in a variety of presentation formats. Furthermore, the reports provide interactive features that allow the end user to study the data from multiple points of view -- from highly summarized to very detailed data. The reports present key actionable information used to support decision making.
					Monitoring and alerting - After decision has been made, the BI system offers ways to monitor the decision's outcome. The BI system provides the end user with ways to define metrics and other key performance indicators to evaluate different aspects of an organization. In addition, exceptions and alerts can be set to warn managers promptly about deviations or problem areas.
					Advanced data analytics - BI system provides tools to help the end user discover relationships, patterns, and trends hidden within the organization's data. These tools are used to create two types of data analysis: explanatory and predictive. Explanatory analysis provides ways to discover relationships, trends, and patterns among data, while predictive analysis provides the end user with ways to create models that predict future outcomes.
                business intelligence benefits
				BI provides other benefits:
					Integrating architecture : Like any other IT product, BI has the potential of becoming the integrating umbrella for a disparate mix of IT systems within an organization. This architecture could support all types of company-generated data from operational to executive, as well as diverse hardware such as mainframes, servers, desktops, laptops, and mobile devices.
					Common user interface for data reporting and analysis :  BI front ends can provide up-to-the-minute consolidated information using a common interface for all company users. IT departments no longer have to provide multiple training options for diverse interfaces. End users benefit from similar or common interfaces in diffent devices that use multiple clever and insightful presentation formats.
					Common data repository fosters single version of company data : in the past, multiple IT systems supported different aspects of an organization's operations. Such systems collected and stored data in seperate data stores. Keeping the data synchronized and up to date has always been difficult. BI provides a framework to integrate such data under a common environment and present a single version of the data.
					Improved organizational performance : BI can provide competitive advantages in many different areas, from customer support to manufacturing processes. Such advantages can be reflected in added effciency, reduced waste, increased sales, reduced emeployee and customer turnover, and most importanly, an increased bottom line for the business.
                business intelligence evolution
			def - decisions support system (DSS): An arrangement of computerized tools used to assist mangerial decision making within a businesses.
			evolution of information dissemination styles
				Starting in the late 1970s, the need for information distribution was filled by centralized reports running on mainframes, minicomputers, or central server environments. Such reports were predefined and took considerable time to process
				with the introduction of desktop computers in the 1980s, a new style of information distribution, the spreadsheet, emerged as the dominant format for decision support systems. In this environment, managers downloaded information from centralized data stores and manipulated the data in desktop spreadsheets.
				as the use of spreadsheets multiplied, IT departments tried to manage the flow of data in a more formal way using enterprise reporting systems. These systems were developed in the early 1990s and basically integrated all data into an IT umbrella that started with the first-generation DSS. The systems still used spreadsheet-like features with which end users were familiar.
				Once DSS's were established, the evolution of business intelligence flourished with th introduction of the data warehouse and online analytical processing systems (OLAPs) in the mid-1990s
				Rapid changes in information technology and the INternet revolution led to the introduction of advanced BI systems such as web-based dashboards in the early and mid 2000s and mobile BI later in the decade. With mobile BI, end user access BI reports via native applications that run on a mobile device, such as smartphone or tablet.
				More recently, the social media revolution has generated large amounts of data. At the same time sensor-generated data is being collected and stored. Companies are using Big Data analytics and data visualization to leverage such data and obtain critical information otherwise unavailable to them.
                        table 13.4: Business intelligence evolution
				Traditional mainframe-based online transaction processing (OLTP) uses operational data, and reports read and summarized data directly from operational data (no extraction) and temporary files used for reporting purposes (no data store), The end-user query tool has very basic Predefined reporting [which] formats Basic sorting, totaling, and averaging; and very basic Menu-driven, predefined reports, with text and numbers only, function as the end user presentation tool
				Managerial information system (MIS) uses operational data, performs bsic extraction and aggregation (read, filter, and summarizes operational data into intermediate data store that is a lightly aggregated data in RDBMS) The end-user query tool has very basic Predefined reporting [which] formats Basic sorting, totaling, and averaging; and very basic Menu-driven, predefined reports, with text and numbers only, function as the end user presentation tool in addition to some ad hoc columnar report definitions
				First-generation departmental decision support system (DSS) uses both operational data and external data, performs data extraction and integration process populates DSS data store (First DSS database generation, usually RDBMS)that runs periodically and uses for the end user a query tool with sosme analytical capabilities and predefined reports, and presents spreadsheet style with advanced presentation tools with plotting and graphics capabilities
				First-generation BI uses both operational and external data, performs advanced data extraction and integration accessing diverse data sources, filters, aggregations, classifications, scheduling, and conflict resolution; has a data warehouse RDBMS technology optimized for query purposes and a star schema model; and uses for the end user a query tool with sosme analytical capabilities and predefined reports, and presents spreadsheet style with advanced presentation tools with plotting and graphics capabilities in addition to multidimensional presentation tools with drill-down capabilities
				Second-generation BI online analytical processing uses both operational and external data, performs advanced data extraction and integration accessing diverse data sources, filters, aggregations, classifications, scheduling, and conflict resolution; has a data warehouse that stores data in MDBMS Cubes with multiple dimensions, adds support for end-user-based data analytics in the end-user query tool, and presents spreadsheet style with advanced presentation tools with plotting and graphics capabilities in addition to multidimensional presentation tools with drill-down capabilities but uses cubes and multidimensional matrixes; limited by cube size Dashboards Scorecards Portals
				Third generation Mobile, cloud-based, and Big Datauses both operational and external data that includes social media and machine-generated data, performs advanced data extraction and integration accessing diverse data sources, filters, aggregations, classifications, scheduling, and conflict resolution, all while being cloud-based; along with Cloud-based Hadoop and NoSQL databases it has a data warehouse that stores data in MDBMS Cubes with multiple dimensions, uses advanced analytics Flexible ad hoc interactions via data visualization, and presents with mobile devices: [such as] smartphones and tablets
                        figure 13.2: evolution of BI information dissemination formats
				70s: centralized reporting
				80s: spreadsheets
				90s: enterprise reporting and OLAP
				00s: Dashboards and mobile BI
				10s: Big Data analytics/Hadoop/NoSQL/Data visualization
                business intelligence technology trends
			More remarkable technological trends:
				Data storage improvements (SSDs and SATA --10TB)
				Business Intelligence appliances (plug and play appliances optimized for data warehouse and BI applications that offer improved price-performance ratios, simplified administration, rapid installation, scalability, and fast integration -- offered by vendors such as IBM,Netezza, EMC Greenplum and Teradata Aster)
				Business Intelligence as a service (data warehouses and BI as a service that allow test driving with pay-as-you-go plans -- offered by vendors such as IBM, Oracle, Microsoft, Teradata, MIcroStrategy, and SAP)
				Big Data analytics (Organizations are turning to social media as the new source for information and knowledge to gain competitive advantages)
				Personal analytics (OLAP brought data analytics to the desktop of every end user in an organization. Mobile BI is extending business decision making outside the walls of the organization. BI can now be deployed to mobile users who are closer to customers. The main requirement is for the BI end user to have a key understanding of the business. Some personal analytics vendors include MicroStrategy, QlikView, and Tableau. There is a growing trend toward self-service, personalized data analytics. It is not so far-fetched to imagine that in a few years, end users will have smart data analytics agents on their smartphones tailored to their personal interests. Such personal agents will provide users with up-to-the-minute "Intelligent Knowledge" about their personal interests)
        decision support data
				Although BI is used at the strategic and tactical managerial levels within organizations, its effectiveness depends on the quality of data gathered at the operational level.
                operational data versus decision support data
			differences
				time span (operational short time frame, decision support data has long time frame)
				granularity (levels of aggregation) - decision support data must be present at different levels of aggregation, from highly summarized to nearly atomic
					drill down : decompose data into more atomic components
					roll up : aggregate data into summarized components OR is an olap extension used within the GROUP BY clause to aggregate data by different dimensions
				dimensionality (operational data is individual transactions rather than the effects of them over time)
                figure 13.3
		decision support database requirements
                        Data extraction and filtering
                        database size
        the data warehouse
                        table 13.8
                        figure 13.4
                data marts
                twelve rules that define a data warehouse
        star schemas
                        table 13.9
                facts
                dimensions
                        figure 13.5
                attributes
                        table 13.10
                        figure 13.6
                        figure 13.7
                attribute hierarchy
                        figure 13.8
                        figure 13.9
                star schema representation
                        figure 13.10
                performance improving techniques for the star schema
                        techniques to  optimize data warehouse design
				normalizing dimensional (1 key) tables
				maintaining multiple fact tables to represent different aggregation levels
				denormalizing fact (many key) tables
				partitioning and replicating tables
			figure 13.11
                        normalizing dimensional tables
                        figure 13.12
                        maintaining multiple fact tables that represent different aggregation levels
                        denormalizing fact tables
                        figure 13.13
                        partitioning and replicating tables
        online analytical processing
                multidimensional data analysis techniques
                        figure 13.14
                advanced database support
                easy-to-use end-user interfaces
                olap architecture
                        figure 13.15
                        figure 13.16
                        figure 13.17
                relational olap
                        multidimensional data schema support within the rdbms
                        data access language and query performance optimized for multidimensional data
                        table 13.11
                        support for very large databases
                multidimensional olap
                relational versus multidimensional olap
                        table 13.12
        data analytics
                data mining
			phases
				Data preparation (datasets are identified and cleansed)
				knowledge acquition (identify common characterics/patterns)
				prognosis (predict future behavior and forecast business outcomes)
			modes
				guided (end user guides step by step)
				automated (data mining tool runs automatically and uncovers hidden patterns, trands, and relationships)
                        figure 13.18
                        figure 13.19
                predictive analytics
        sql analytic functions
                        figure 13.20
                rollup extension
			generate aggregates by different dimensions
                        	group by will generate only one aggregate for each new value combination, rollup goes one step further and enables to get a subtotal for each column listed except for the last one which gets a grand total instead (think group by with location 
			figure 13.21
                cube extension
			
                        figure 13.22
                materialized views
                        figure 13.23
                        figure 13.24
                        figure 13.25
        data visualization
                        figure 13.26
                the need for data visualization
                        figure 13.27
                the science of data visualization
                        figure 13.28
                        figure 13.29
                understanding the data
                        figure 13.30
